---
layout: post
title: New Site
---
I finally decided to spruce things up around here, so following [Carl's advice](https://carlkolon.com/2021/07/31/websitejekyll.html), I set up [jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) and had a go. I'm no web designer, as you can see, but at least there's a place for my stuff. I'm not interested in contributing to the [Surveillance Economy](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/master-or-slave-the-fight-for-the-soul-of-our-information-civilization_shoshana-zuboff/13538101/?resultid=e578f82c-fc68-4bbe-b282-99e88ca391af#edition=13213891&idiq=31006392) any more than I must, which is why I have this site rather than using a more common social media platform. Less traffic, sure, but hey - you're here, right?

***

The design is kind of Air-Raid Modern meets Bauhaus, but I hope to improve it over time. Yeah, I'm probably never going to improve it. But there are some things I'd like to do to make it more readable and prettier on a mobile phone. But you shouldn't be reading this on a phone, anyway - put it down! Go outside! Come back to my site when you're sitting at a proper computer.

As Carl mentions in his post, one can spend a lot of time dinking around with Wordpress only to find there'a much simpler way to do things for a small site, not that jekyll isn't capable of much more. 

By the way, there was a lot of crap on the old site, and I've only moved the things that seemed worth it. So in the very unlikely event you're looking for something you saw there, ask me - it's probably still kicking around somewhere.

Future plans include:

- The Mansfield Cam (gallery of Mt Mansfield past, current, and future?)
- Database of the 652 flights I took during my 12 years living in China and Japan. (I have records. Of them all. I'm not sure why.)
- 
