---
layout: post
title: Don Giovanni
---

Herding the cats for a DG field trip this fall.

***


Dudes,

I want to fulfill my promise on this topic—and I’m genuinely excited about the potential outcome—so here are a few thoughts on a possible *Don Giovanni* field trip.

Patty and I have tickets for the [October 25 matinee performance](https://www.metopera.org/season/2025-26-season/don-giovanni/) of Mozart's **Don Giovanni** at the Metropolitan Opera in New York (1:00 p.m.). As you know, we see many operas, but this will be our first of the new season and we're psyched. We saw the same production last year and signed up again because it was just that good. There's lots more to say about the cast and production but that can wait.

The Met is always great, but we're seeing *Don Giovanni* again for another reason: it’s arguably the greatest opera ever written. Really—if you could only see one opera in your life, DG might be the one. This is especially true if you lean dark and cynical, and aren’t looking for easy answers. The combination of *Don Giovanni*, at the Met, in NYC, in late October (especially for Vermonters) is simply too good to pass up.

If you’re curious about what you’d be in for, here are some resources:
- [Synopsis of the plot](https://www.metopera.org/discover/synopses/don-giovanni/)
- [Spreadsheet I made long ago](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1nfBMcUBQ4AmJUuS8T4Rb3mTORhxJ8MGeq3pH0p9tw3k/edit?gid=1260725754#gid=1260725754) of the arias and scenes, with notes on each
- [Article supporting my argument](https://blogs.wdav.org/2019/10/why-is-don-giovanni-the-worlds-greatest-opera/)
- [Seattle Opera’s blog](https://www.seattleoperablog.com/2021/03/the-myth-behind-mozarts-don-giovanni.html) about the Don Juan connection
- [Met’s Educator Guide](https://www.metopera.org/globalassets/discover/education/educator-guides/don-giovanni/dongiovanni.16-17.guide.pdf)
- [Listen to the opera on Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/album/1BL8KsbXhR2bbDaTmv0EYJ?si=yzfi9kIMRoSrEbsG74womg)

For those who end up joining us and are interested, Patty and I have a lot more to say if you want to hear it. Here's a [link to our plans](https://mattkolon.com/2025/04/01/met.html) for the entire 25-26 season.

**Be Aware:**  
*Don Giovanni* is a popular opera, and tickets can sell out. They're also cheaper (and come with better seat options) if you buy early—same goes for hotels. So the sooner you commit, the better. If enough of us go, we could also plan dinner or other activities.

Since we're Met subscribers, I can buy your tickets now—they won’t be available to the general public until sometime in later June I believe. There are lots of seating and pricing options available, but expect to spend $200–300 per ticket. Patty and I usually get Dress Circle seats, which I recommend as a good balance of price and experience. But pick whatever suits you—it’s the same show either way.

**Accommodations:**  
I don’t have specific hotel recommendations, but I suggest avoiding Times Square. It’s overrun with tourists (and the blech that comes with them). While TS is convenient, you’ll likely have a better experience staying elsewhere. I’m happy to offer more brutally honest biases if you want help choosing between various options you've found.

You’ll probably want to stay the nights of October 24 and 25, but do what works for you. One night in NYC isn’t really enough—even with a matinee. In terms of travel, Patty and I usually drive to New Haven, park at the station there, and take the Metro North train into Grand Central. Flights can be cheap in October, too, so that's worth checking. Could you fly in, see the show, and fly out the same day? Technically yes. Should you? Absolutely not.

So **Who’s in?** I’ll hassle you at the next UMLS meeting, but feel free to make your own arrangements if you'd rather. No gatekeeping here. I just hope everyone’s in, with your wifeys, and we can have a big opera party in the city while the last Vermont leaves vanish in the rain. I'm okay missing that part.

**Rispondetemi!**  
(Peter is likely the only one who'll get the reference right away, but you all will after you see DG.)

/matt 

## Frequently Asked Questions

### Q: Isn't opera a stuffy, elite, annoying, snooty snob-fest?
A: No. Opera is whatever you want it to be. If you want to dress up, you can, and you can buy overpriced champagne and snacks, or eat in the schmancy cafe there. But unless it's a gala premiere or other special event, the Met is pretty chill. We love opera and think it's a bit special, so tend to [dress in not-jeans](https://photos.google.com/share/AF1QipOnmyRT9zl2K7GrFnD2j2q2quYIb2FLLj-dFSin8afJo-R-kZm8zu4_QttxU3zuwA?key=eFNlb21XeHpNa2hRSU9MRVpYZUFiVDVnMHFQWWdR), but plenty of people just come as they are. Things are even more casual for a matinee such as we're seeing.

### Q: The synopsis above was confusing, what's DG all about?
A: Don Giovanni, a rich and powerful misogynist (and likely serial rapist) eventually meets his deserved horrible end. Along the way, examples of innocent youthful love, terrible betrayal, awful trauma, and class conflict abound. The Don's faithful servant provides both comic relief and some help to his victims. Any resemblance to Don Trump is coincidental, but it's really close sometimes. He just hasn't been dragged to hell by the devil yet.

### Q: Why not go to a Broadway show, or a Yankees game instead?
A: Indeed, why not do that too? I think opera is a unique kind of entertainment that combines music and drama in ways that nothing else quite does. At the Met, you'll see perhaps the best opera house in the world, offering both classic and new operas, with respect for both hundreds of years of history and new, cutting-edge ideas. Also always featuring the best musicians in the world, on the stage and in the pit. I don't love every opera I see, but damn, there's always something amazing.

### Q: How do you know what's happening if you don't speak the language?
A: Don Giovanni is in Italian, but even when the opera is in English, it's usually tough to understand. Singers emphasize tone and melody over comprehensability. Luckily, each seat has "Met titles" in a display on the back of the seat in front of you, where you can see a translation of what's being sung in real time. You can also shut them off. 

### Q: I think this might be boring.
A: Fair enough. This strage operatic caterwauling can be off-putting, particularly if you haven't heard it much before, and if you tune out you might find yourself wondering "when is this going to end?" It takes a bit of experience to really grok some of it. But even to the new listener, there are moments of unsurpassed beauty, crushing sadness, fierce anger, supernatural horror, and even hilarious slapstick to reward you. Sometimes they're right there, sometimes you have to work a bit to appreciate them. In Don Giovanni, there is a very high ratio of awesome to boring, which is one reason we picked it. You can see from the pictures that this production is [staged in the modern day](https://www.metopera.org/season/2025-26-season/don-giovanni/), and that makes it more relatable and accessible than [if it were staged in 1787](https://chicagocritic.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/giov112.jpg) when Mozart wrote it. 

### Q: What about rush tickets? You know, the $50 ones they sell just before the curtain?
A: Great idea, but hard to plan. One never knows if there will be any available at all, or where the seats will be located. A nice way to fill some last-minute dead time if you're already in the city, but not a great idea to plan a trip around.




